docs/userguide/docs/about.md, before:

# About


## License

`kalasim` is licensed under MIT License.


## Acknowledgements

### salabim

`kalasim` started off as a blunt rewrite of [salabim](https://www.salabim.org/). We are deeply thankful for its permissive licence that enabled setting up `kalasim`. A great starting point was in particular the wonderful article [salabim: discrete event simulation and animation in Python](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/salabim%3A-discrete-event-simulation-and-animation-in-Ham/b513ce3d7cd56c478bb045d7080f7e34c0eb20de).

`salabim`s excellent documentation and wonderful examples made this project possible after all. `kalasim` reimplements all core APIs of `salabim` in a more typesafe API while also providing better test coverage, real-time capabilities and (arguably) more modern built-in support for visualization.

* [Salabim, Discrete Event Simulation In Python](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I74j2KtGouA) - PyCon 2018 Talk
* [Python.__init__ Podcast: Salabim](https://www.pythonpodcast.com/salabim-with-ruud-van-der-ham-episode-151/) - Great podcast episode with [Ruud van der Ham](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ruudvanderham/)

### simmer

[simmer](https://r-simmer.org/) is a process-oriented and trajectory-based Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) package for R.

It centres around the concept of a *trajectory* that defines a component lifecycle. To enable scale it is built on top of Rcpp (C++ backend for R).

* Great overview [simmer: Discrete-Event Simulation for R](https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v090i02), Ucar et al., 2019
* Support for optimization in [simmer.optim](https://github.com/r-simmer/simmer.optim)

We have adopted several examples and documentation bits from `simmer`, and are deeply grateful to the simmer developers for providing such a great and well maintained tool. `simmer` has also been a great source of inspiration to implement in particular the monitoring and visualization API of `kalasim`.

### SimJulia

[SimJulia](https://simjuliajl.readthedocs.io/en/stable/welcome.html) is a combined continuous time / discrete event process oriented simulation framework written in Julia inspired by the Simula library DISCO and the Python library SimPy.

We have adopted several examples and documentation bits from `SimJulia`, and are deeply grateful its developers for providing such a great and well maintained tool.

### SimPy

[SimPy](https://simpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) is a process-based discrete-event simulation framework based on standard Python. Processes in `SimPy` are defined by Python generator functions. `SimPy` also provides various types of shared resources to model limited capacity congestion points (like servers, checkout counters and tunnels).

We have adopted several examples and documentation bits from `SimPy`, and are deeply grateful its developers for providing such a great and well maintained tool.


### DSOL

[DSOL3](https://simulation.tudelft.nl/simulation/index.php/dsol) which is an open source, Java based suite of Java classes for continuous and discrete event simulation

* The wonderful [DSOL manual](https://simulation.tudelft.nl/dsol/manual/)
* [The DSOL simulation suite - Enabling multi-formalism simulation in a distributed context](https://simulation.tudelft.nl/files/dissertations/tpm_jacobs_20051115.pdf), PhD Thesis, Peter Jacobs, 2005
* [Mastering D-SOL: A Java based suite for simulation](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228941076_Mastering_D-SOL_A_Java_based_suite_for_simulation) with several examples, 2006
* [opentrafficsim](https://opentrafficsim.org/manual/) is a traffic simulation built with DSOL3


### Libraries used to build kalasim

`kalasim`  is built on top of some great libraries. It was derived as merger of ideas, implementation and documentation from the following projects:

* [Kotlin](https://kotlinlang.org/) - Not really a library, but for obvious reasons the foundation of this project
* [koin](https://github.com/InsertKoinIO/koin) which is a pragmatic lightweight dependency injection framework for Kotlin developers
* [Apache Commons Math](https://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-math/) is a library of lightweight, self-contained mathematics and statistics components
* [jsonbuilder](https://github.com/holgerbrandl/jsonbuilder) is a small artifact that serves a single purpose: It allows creating json using an idiomatic kotlin DSL. Its main purpose it to make sure `kalasim` provides a machine-readable log-format for all [basics](basics.md) in a simulation.
* [kotest.io](http://kotest.io/) is a flexible and elegant multiplatform test framework, assertions library, and property test library for Kotlin. We use it to make sure kalasim fulfils its [component](component.md) contract.

Visualization

* <https://github.com/holgerbrandl/kravis> which implements a grammar to create a wide range of plots using a standardized set of verbs
* <https://github.com/JetBrains/lets-plot-kotlin> is an open-source plotting library for statistical data.


Inspirations

* [atomic-agents](https://gjmcn.github.io/atomic-agents/index.html) - Spatial Agent-based Modeling in JavaScript

### YouKit Profiler

With `kalasim`, we strive to enable large-scale time-discrete simulation models.
To optimize the API and the engine for perormance, we rely
on [YourKit profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/java/profiler/).
With its wonderful interface into JDK performace metrics,
YourKit profiler allows us to signifantly improve the overall speed while reducing the memory footprint of `kalasim`.

![](https://www.yourkit.com/images/yklogo.png)

YourKit supports open source projects with innovative and intelligent tools for monitoring and profiling Java and .NET
applications. YourKit is the creator of [YourKit Java Profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/java/profiler/).

## Repo Maintainer

[Holger Brandl](https://linkedin.com/in/holgerbrandl/) holds a Ph.D. degree in machine learning and has developed new concepts in the field of computational linguistics. More recently he has co-authored [publications](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1911-8570) in high-ranking journals such as Nature and Science.

To stay in sync with what's happening in tech, he's [developing](https://github.com/holgerbrandl) open-source tools, methods and algorithms for bioinformatics, high-performance computing and data science. He's passionate about machine learning, AI, analytics, elegant APIs and data visualisation. His professional scope mainly centers around systems biology and industrial manufacturing.

Commit message:

migrated from `Koin` to `EnvProvider` for dependency handling, significantly improving simulation environment performance and flexibility

docs/userguide/docs/about.md, after:

# About


## License

`kalasim` is licensed under MIT License.


## Acknowledgements

### salabim

`kalasim` started off as a blunt rewrite of [salabim](https://www.salabim.org/). We are deeply thankful for its permissive licence that enabled setting up `kalasim`. A great starting point was in particular the wonderful article [salabim: discrete event simulation and animation in Python](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/salabim%3A-discrete-event-simulation-and-animation-in-Ham/b513ce3d7cd56c478bb045d7080f7e34c0eb20de).

`salabim`s excellent documentation and wonderful examples made this project possible after all. `kalasim` reimplements all core APIs of `salabim` in a more typesafe API while also providing better test coverage, real-time capabilities and (arguably) more modern built-in support for visualization.

* [Salabim, Discrete Event Simulation In Python](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I74j2KtGouA) - PyCon 2018 Talk
* [Python.__init__ Podcast: Salabim](https://www.pythonpodcast.com/salabim-with-ruud-van-der-ham-episode-151/) - Great podcast episode with [Ruud van der Ham](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ruudvanderham/)

### simmer

[simmer](https://r-simmer.org/) is a process-oriented and trajectory-based Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) package for R.

It centres around the concept of a *trajectory* that defines a component lifecycle. To enable scale it is built on top of Rcpp (C++ backend for R).

* Great overview [simmer: Discrete-Event Simulation for R](https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v090i02), Ucar et al., 2019
* Support for optimization in [simmer.optim](https://github.com/r-simmer/simmer.optim)

We have adopted several examples and documentation bits from `simmer`, and are deeply grateful to the simmer developers for providing such a great and well maintained tool. `simmer` has also been a great source of inspiration to implement in particular the monitoring and visualization API of `kalasim`.

### SimJulia

[SimJulia](https://simjuliajl.readthedocs.io/en/stable/welcome.html) is a combined continuous time / discrete event process oriented simulation framework written in Julia inspired by the Simula library DISCO and the Python library SimPy.

We have adopted several examples and documentation bits from `SimJulia`, and are deeply grateful its developers for providing such a great and well maintained tool.

### SimPy

[SimPy](https://simpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) is a process-based discrete-event simulation framework based on standard Python. Processes in `SimPy` are defined by Python generator functions. `SimPy` also provides various types of shared resources to model limited capacity congestion points (like servers, checkout counters and tunnels).

We have adopted several examples and documentation bits from `SimPy`, and are deeply grateful its developers for providing such a great and well maintained tool.


### DSOL

[DSOL3](https://simulation.tudelft.nl/simulation/index.php/dsol) which is an open source, Java based suite of Java classes for continuous and discrete event simulation

* The wonderful [DSOL manual](https://simulation.tudelft.nl/dsol/manual/)
* [The DSOL simulation suite - Enabling multi-formalism simulation in a distributed context](https://simulation.tudelft.nl/files/dissertations/tpm_jacobs_20051115.pdf), PhD Thesis, Peter Jacobs, 2005
* [Mastering D-SOL: A Java based suite for simulation](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228941076_Mastering_D-SOL_A_Java_based_suite_for_simulation) with several examples, 2006
* [opentrafficsim](https://opentrafficsim.org/manual/) is a traffic simulation built with DSOL3


### Libraries used to build kalasim

`kalasim`  is built on top of some great libraries. It was derived as merger of ideas, implementation and documentation from the following projects:

* [Kotlin](https://kotlinlang.org/) - Not really a library, but for obvious reasons the foundation of this project
* [koin](https://github.com/InsertKoinIO/koin) which is a pragmatic lightweight dependency injection framework for Kotlin developers
* [Apache Commons Math](https://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-math/) is a library of lightweight, self-contained mathematics and statistics components
* [jsonbuilder](https://github.com/holgerbrandl/jsonbuilder) is a small artifact that serves a single purpose: It allows creating json using an idiomatic kotlin DSL. Its main purpose it to make sure `kalasim` provides a machine-readable log-format for all [basics](basics.md) in a simulation.
* [kotest.io](http://kotest.io/) is a flexible and elegant multiplatform test framework, assertions library, and property test library for Kotlin. We use it to make sure kalasim fulfils its [component](component.md) contract.

Visualization

* <https://github.com/holgerbrandl/kravis> which implements a grammar to create a wide range of plots using a standardized set of verbs
* <https://github.com/JetBrains/lets-plot-kotlin> is an open-source plotting library for statistical data.


Inspirations

* [atomic-agents](https://gjmcn.github.io/atomic-agents/index.html) - Spatial Agent-based Modeling in JavaScript

### YouKit Profiler

With `kalasim`, we strive to enable large-scale time-discrete simulation models.
To optimize the API and the engine for perormance, we rely
on [YourKit profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/java/profiler/).
With its wonderful interface into JDK performace metrics,
YourKit profiler allows us to signifantly improve the overall speed while reducing the memory footprint of `kalasim`.

![](https://www.yourkit.com/images/yklogo.png)

YourKit supports open source projects with innovative and intelligent tools for monitoring and profiling Java and .NET
applications. YourKit is the creator of [YourKit Java Profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/java/profiler/).

## Repo Maintainer

Dr. [Holger Brandl](https://linkedin.com/in/holgerbrandl) is a seasoned solution architect and project/team lead with deep experience in automation and material-flow optimization across manufacturing environments. Over the past 6+ years, he has designed and implemented data-driven solutions that improve WIP flow, transparency, and operational efficiency—bridging software architecture, production processes, and applied AI/predictive analytics.

His industry focus includes semiconductor and electronics manufacturing as well as automotive, with expertise spanning material-flow simulation, scheduling and sequencing, predictive maintenance/quality, and manufacturing analytics. He has led cross-functional teams from concept to rollout, contributed to product design of AI-driven planning solutions, and supported pre-sales and portfolio activities. Holger is also a [published](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1911-8570) author (including journals such as Science, Nature, and Cell).

To stay in sync with what's happening in tech, he [develops](https://github.com/holgerbrandl) open-source tools, methods and algorithms for bioinformatics, high-performance computing and data science. He is passionate about machine learning, AI, analytics, elegant APIs and data visualization. His professional scope mainly centers around systems biology and industrial manufacturing.
