docs/userguide/docs/analysis.md, before:

# Analysis

A core aspect when building simulations is to understand, define and modulate the inherent system dynamics. To build a correct simulation, the designer/developer must carefully analyze how states progress over time.

To facilitate this process, it offers various means to analyze data created by a simulation

* [Event Log](#event-log) - to track state changes
* [Monitors](monitors.md) - to track state and statistics of the [basic](basics.md) elements within a simulation


## Event Log

While a simulation is running, we get the following output (displayed as table for convenience):

```
time      current component        component                action      info                          
--------- ------------------------ ------------------------ ----------- -----------------------------
.00                                main                     DATA        create
.00       main
.00                                Car.1                    DATA        create
.00                                Car.1                    DATA        activate
.00                                main                     CURRENT     run +5.0
.00       Car.1
.00                                Car.1                    CURRENT     hold +1.0
1.00                               Car.1                    CURRENT
1.00                               Car.1                    DATA        ended
5.00      main
Process finished with exit code 0
```

This output is the default logging mechanism.

For larger simulations, console logging might not scale. Also, users may want to consume state changes for analysis and visualization. To support these use-cases, default logging can be disabled and custom log handlers can be added.

```kotlin
// create simulation without default console logging
val sim = createSimulation(enableTraceLogger = false) {  }

// add custom log consumer
sim.addTraceListener(TraceListener { traceElement -> TODO("do something with")  })
```


## Monitors

See chapter about monitors

## Visualization

Commit message:

Changed trace logging default to false

docs/userguide/docs/analysis.md, after:

# Analysis

A core aspect when building simulations is to understand, define and modulate the inherent system dynamics. To build a correct simulation, the designer/developer must carefully analyze how states progress over time.

To facilitate this process, it offers various means to analyze data created by a simulation

* [Event Log](#event-log) - to track state changes
* [Monitors](monitors.md) - to track state and statistics of the [basic](basics.md) elements within a simulation


## Event Log

While a simulation is running, we get the following output (displayed as table for convenience):

```
time      current component        component                action      info                          
--------- ------------------------ ------------------------ ----------- -----------------------------
.00                                main                     DATA        create
.00       main
.00                                Car.1                    DATA        create
.00                                Car.1                    DATA        activate
.00                                main                     CURRENT     run +5.0
.00       Car.1
.00                                Car.1                    CURRENT     hold +1.0
1.00                               Car.1                    CURRENT
1.00                               Car.1                    DATA        ended
5.00      main
Process finished with exit code 0
```

This output is not active by default, but must be enabled when creating the simulation with `createSimulation(enableTraceLogger = true)`

For larger simulations, console logging might not scale. Also, users may want to consume state changes for analysis and visualization. To support these use-cases, default logging can be disabled and custom log handlers can be added.

```kotlin
// create simulation without default console logging
val sim = createSimulation(enableTraceLogger = false) {  }

// add custom log consumer
sim.addTraceListener(TraceListener { traceElement -> TODO("do something with")  })
```


## Monitors

See chapter about monitors

## Visualization
